
This a summary of my work as a participant of the Google Summer of Code 2020 program for the TARDIS organization, what's left to do and more.

[TARDIS](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/) creates synthetic supernova sprectra by simulating the interaction of black body radiation through an ejecta of gas and metals.
The piece of the code that models the ejecta is called Radial1DModel. Its function is to read input files, parse data, calculate relevant quantities needed and create a model for TARDIS to function.

[Restructure Project](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/projects/11)

Original plan: Restructure the Radial1DModel into something a better structured, and more flexible model in order to accommodate code extension (like adding other format readers, easing up capabilities to modify models on the fly,...).

This plan included the use Abstract Base Classes for a Generic Ejecta Model, and use inheritance to construct TARDIS model, config model, and CSVY model. Also use the same method to have a Generic Reader and construct with them a config and CSVY readers.

Abstract Base Classes are not a recommended refactoring method for Python and I switched to doing normal inheritance instead and an Generic model that could be instantiated.

The generic model is a lot more flexible than the model that TARDIS needs to function, it would be constructed from its properties, stored as classes and contain all related properties, as well as handle time initialization, check units, and construct quantities from input information. Information stored in these classes can be accessed as attributes.

A BaseProperty is the class that all properties needed to construct an ejecta model inherit from, and for now handles the initialization of time, comparison of number of cells between properties, and most of the work needed to construc a dataframe from the internal attributes of the property. Is not intended to be used on its own, but as a parent class in the MRO.

Properties implemented so far are:

- Velocity
- Density
- Abundances
- Radiation Field

Velocity includes velocities and space related quantities like radii and volume.

Density class includes mass and electron densities, although TARDIS has no use for electron densities yet.

Abundance stores fractional mass element and isotope abundances and are stored as dataframes. It relies heavily on the already implemented IsotopeAbundance class. 

Radiation Field encloses radiative temperature of each shell and dilution factor.

The Generic Model takes properties defined above as parameters along with a time argument, checks time consistency and number of cells, and advances all properties to the latest time possible (if time passed as argument is lower than one of a property, the time of the property will be used).
All properties in the model can be accessed as attributes, and the method `to_dataframe()` contructs a dataframe of the most relevant attributes of the model.

It is a useful tool for experimentation and intended to be the parent class for TARDIS, CSVY and config models. Drafts for CSVY and config classes exist but will not be submitted for review before the end of the summer.

As for the readers, I made progress with both the CSVY reader and config reader, however due to the time left on the GSoC won't be submitted for review either. Complications arise when trying to standardize the reader class, because of how different both readers work and construct quantities, I will work on these later.

PR on this project: [#1270](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/pull/1270), [#1276](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/pull/1276)

What's next?

 - For the BaseProperty and property classes, I think more functionality can be added to them, as an example the class HomologousDenstity has a lot of functionality that could be moved to the Density class, the same with the IsotopeAbundance and the Abundance class. Similar functionality can be added to the Velocity and RadiationField classes to add support for model config files.
 - Rework the Abundances class to maintain MultiIndex when merging element with isotope abundances.
 - Add support for visualization of the model using Jaladh's GUI implementation.
 - Create config and CSVY readers and classes and standardize a basic model for more readers to adopt.
 - Create a TARDIS model which would have all quantities needed to use for a TARDIS simulation.
 - Include functionality that Marc is working on, such as save to CSVY and insert new cells to the ejecta model.
 - Research the rest of the code to see if these approach can be applied to other parts of the code.

Issues related to future work: [#1184](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/issues/1184)

[New readers](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/projects/15)

A project that is very close to the Radial1DModel is the New readers project.

Currently TARDIS reads a yaml file for configuration. A specific part of the configuration is the model section and can contain one of two options:

 - The 'model' keyword: quantities are declared inside this section and are usually parameters for the creation of the arrays. E.g. `initial velocity`, `end velocity` and `num` would create a velocity array that starts in `initial velocity`, ends in `end velocity` and has `num` number of cells.
 - The 'csvy model' keyword: its a reference to the csvy file that contains all quantities defined in a csv section.

Problem: These are 2 very different ways to treat the same part of the model.

The proposed solution is to change the options 'model' and 'csvy model' to a model section that would have 'filetype' to indicate csvy or config yaml, and a 'filename' to reference the file containing information.

Further problem: although there a distinction between 'model' and 'csvy model', the 'model' parameters can be a reference to data stored as tables (replicating the csvy model's functionality), and inside the csvy file used for 'csvy model' parameters can be passed to create quantities in the same way as 'model' does. Essentially there are 2 supposedly distinct ways to pass data to TARDIS, but are completely interchangeable.

In addition to changing the behaviour of the 'model' keyword described in the previous paragraph, it was proposed to limit the options of both ways of declaring data to work only one way: stored data will be passed through the csvy file, and generated data will be passed through a 'config' yaml file. A new project was started in TARDIS for this purpose.

Steps for this project include:

 1. Modify model and csvy-model schemas to remove cross-method support.
 2. Add config model schema and add support for time\_0 values.
 3. Modify TARDIS config schema to change model keyword parameters.
 4. Modify tests that try to create models this way and replace them where needed.
 5. Replace references to 'csvy model' inside TARDIS
 6. Create a utility to convert a old TARDIS configuration files to this implementation.
 7. Testing

Issues related to this: [#1239](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/issues/1239)

During the GSoC I found a bug in the `from_csvy` method of the Radial1DModel, isotope abundances were not store properly. This bug was only present in one function and its effects were fairly small. However when dealing with scientific software it can be a big problem, if we try to produce reliable code. This also meant that the function responsible for storing the data was not properly tested.
 After confirmation of the bug, I wrote a bug fix, that in itself wasn't very hard. To avoid future bugs in this section of TARDIS I wrote extensive tests to cover all the possibilities that I could think of, and modified reference data files to explain their usage as well as I could. Some files were not being used so I deleted them. Information regarding this can be found in issue [#1228](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/issues/1228) and merged PR [#1235](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/pull/1235).

Other pending projects:

 - [Build documentation locally and documentation guidelines for PR.](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/issues/1252)
 - Add issue templates.
 - [Add pyne installation instructions and FAQ](https://github.com/tardis-sn/tardis/issues/1256).
